One aspect we’d like to spend time discussing is the data preparation. The API we used, which can be found at https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/data/, was a great jumping off point, but was far from production-ready. First, we had to narrow down the list of schools that we wished to include in our program’s recommendation tool, as the API had almost every school in the country. To start, we removed schools with median ACT scores of 23 or lower. This left us with around 400 schools, which was more manageable.     

The next step with data preparation was to decide which dimensions (or columns) we wanted to include. The College Scorecard from above described colleges across hundreds of dimensions, and we wanted to select a few that we thought were fundamental in the decision-making process. The variables we aligned on were location, national ranking, size, urbanization, and student: faculty ratio.       

The easy part of this process was deleting all of the columns that were not in the group above. However, the next step – gathering data for each school on the aspects that we did not already have – was more difficult. The College Scorecard API contained information on location, size, and urbanization, but did not have rankings or student: faculty ratio data. We found another dataset with university rankings, which can be found at https://data.world/education/university-rankings-2017, and did our best to join the two. This rankings dataset did not include some of the 400 schools from above, and many of the names were mismatched (e.g. “University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill” vs. “University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill”). After manually cleaning up the names, we used VLOOKUP in Excel to match the rankings with the schools, and the final list contained 141 colleges. We couldn’t find a consolidated source with accurate student: faculty ratio data, so we added these in manually as well (based on many Google searches!). Had we used a larger dataset (1,000+ schools), this would have been a more serious issue. Fortunately, the relatively small size made some of our challenges more manageable.       
